when you do the office of a midwife to
the Hebrew women and see them upon the
birthing stools if it be a son
then you shall kill him
and that's that instrumental usage that
you were talking about before there is a
huge issue here
the Hebrew is completely indeterminative
whether the midwives were Hebrews or not
and I'm not going to throw out Hebrew
often but it's I I feel very
self-conscious at all
but uh for those who know Hebrew they
will know what I'm talking about it can
be the Hebrew midwives or The Midwives
of the Hebrews there is no possible way
based on those two words to know which
it is I am convinced and Jewish
tradition doesn't agree with me I mean
post-biblical Jewish tradition the Torah
I think does agree with me but celave
uh I don't I believe they were they were
Egyptian I do not believe he would have
ordered he Hebrew midwives to murder
every Hebrew boy do you think there's a
do you think there's a purposeful
ambiguity there to leave it up to the
question that's beautiful it may well be
that's right well it certainly is the
Hebrew the Hebrew is is ambiguous that
is I mean if a tyranny gets corrupt
enough then people turn against
themselves that's right however
just on logical grounds when he gets
angry at them
for not doing it it would be odd he'd
get angry at Hebrews for not killing
Hebrews but my biggest proof you're
coming to
where they s it says that they feared
God and didn't listen to Pharaoh again
it's one of my favorite lines in the
whole Bible
you either fear
humans or you fear God fear God is the
root of freedom and wisdom and they
uh the word for God is Not Jehovah or
Yahweh it's Elohim
so when Jews fear God it's generally
feared Yahweh and in this case it's fear
Elohim and the universal word for God
and I'm convinced that they are
Egyptians
Douglas do you have any sense of what it
means In this passage and more broadly
that the fear of God is the beginning of
wisdom and and an appropriate let's say
precondition for Freedom why why do you
think it's conceptualized as as fear
well I think there's uh a proper fear
that in this case I think is linked to
Transcendence
so
um there's the the fear of the the
Tyrant which is normal and natural
um and which we are all subject to but
there should be a greater fear I the
fear of the Transcendence
violating that right right
um and of course this is why the uh
post-modern attack on traditional
Western culture is so dangerous I mean
of course it goes back to the very
origins of Western culture with the
surface but the idea that uh there is no
such thing as a an objective moral order
and there certainly is no Transcendent
basis for that
um that would make this whole narrative
unintelligible it also makes the Tyrant
the final Arbiter in some real sense
right
you know people have asked me
and I'm always embarrassed by this but
people have commented on my courage for
speaking up so to speak and I think you
don't actually understand the situation
I'm not courageous in my speaking up I'm
more afraid of the alternative and part
of the reason for that was that when I
was a clinician I spent thousands tens
of thousands of hours dealing with
people's serious problems one of the
things I learned was and I really
learned this was that
you don't get away with anything and so
you might think you can bend the fabric
of reality and that you can treat people
instrumentally and that you can bow to
the Tyrant without and violate your
conscience without cost but that is just
not the case the the you will pay the
piper
[Music]
thank you